4. Discussion  
DISCUSSION OF BACKGROUND REMOVAL EFFECTS, FOLLOWED BY DISCUSSION RELATED TO TABLE 1. TO BE DONE  
      The visual evaluation of insect presence recorded on a laptop screen is influenced by the activity of larvae and the distance of the sensor from the larvae's feeding site. As the distance of the sensor placement on the wooden surface from the larvae's feeding site increased, the recording level (how else to name it?) decreased due to the reduction in the size of the conventional energy, which had previously been determined in laboratory studies [Krajewski et al. 2022].  
      With normal daily variations, temperature is the main influencing factor regarding insect activity [Pallaske 1986, Creemers 2015, Nowakowska et al. 2017, Krajewski et al. 2020], although for individual Hylotrupes larvae, significant phases of inactivity were observed. Temperature itself is more of an influencing factor regarding insect activity than the specific time of day (as dictated by internal circadian rhythms). The higher the temperature, the more AE events occur. There appears to be no apparent daily rhythm other than the influence of temperature [Creemers 2015]. Pallaske [1986] kept his larvae under alternating conditions of 12 hours at 18 °C and 12 hours at 25 °C, measuring clearly greater activity during the warmer phases.  
      However, in our studies conducted in the attics of buildings during summer, the air temperature in Warsaw showed significantly greater fluctuations and much higher extremes at the end of the day, reaching levels of up to 40°C in some cases on the attics used in the research. Consequently, after a three-week period of such temperatures, the internal temperature of the wood must have risen above 30°C. As indicated by our earlier laboratory experiences [Krajewski et al. 2020], a temperature of 36°C causes minimal activity expressed as the number of bites, while a temperature of 40°C completely eliminates larval activity. Additionally, even a temperature of 34°C causes a drastic decline in conventional energy expressed in bites [Krajewski et al. 2020]. These conditions may have caused temporary dormancy of the larvae, for example, in the case of construction II, elements A and E, at a distance of 100 cm, or construction I (element B) and construction III (element A) at a distance of 200 cm.