2. Materials and methods  
The experimental work was conducted on a small garage roof structure (no. I - Fig. 1) with a span of 400 cm and a height of 70 cm, as well as two larger roof structures of single-family houses with a width of 810 cm (no. II - Fig. 2) and 850 cm, each with a height of 500 cm. Measurements on the roof trusses II (Fig. 2) and III were carried out at the upper parts of the structure above the attic. The rafters of structure no. I had a cross-section of 7 x 14 cm. The rafters of structures II and III had a cross-section of 10 x 18 cm. All roofs were covered with metal roofing tiles.  
The recording of the feeding sounds of larvae in wood using the AE method was conducted using an experimental system, described in more detail in previous publications [Krajewski et al. 2012, Bilski et al. 2017, Nowakowska et al. 2017, Krajewski et al. 2020, Krajewski et al. 2022, Krajewski et al. 2024]. Acoustic emission signals were recorded using a system consisting of a piezoelectric sensor (CCLD model 4507-B-005, Bruel & Kjaer), an external sound card (E-MU Tracker Pre, Creative), and a laptop (Lenovo Ideapad) running Windows 7 and Adobe Audition software. The sensor worked through a converter with the sound card directly connected to the computer via USB 2.0. The sampling frequency used was 44.1 kHz at a resolution of 16 bits. The signals were recorded by the sound card and presented in the form of graphic output on the computer monitor. The signals were recorded as the level of signal amplitude relative to the maximum amplitude that could be registered by the sound card, which is the amplitude that can be maximally achieved by adjusting the analog-to-digital converter.  
Recording was conducted using a two-channel method, allowing for the removal of random background noises that did not originate from longhorn beetle larvae. [DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCESS OF REMOVING BACKGROUND NOISE]  
The average density of wood of Scots pine (Pinus sylvestris L.) used for experimental elements was 485 - 510 - 545 kg/m3. The wooden elements used in the experiments contained ½ - ¾ of sapwood. The experiments consisted of two stages. It was assumed that the wooden elements used in the experiments, appropriately secured to the construction, would transmit the electroacoustic signals not only from their interior but also from the roof truss and roof covering. A pair of wooden elements was used each time (control element C without larvae and one of the elements A, B, D, or E with larvae). The larvae were placed in individual blocks with the following masses: A – 0.064 g and 0.015 g, B – 0.053 g and 0.016 g, D – 0.044 g and 0.024 g, and E – 0.027 g and 0.025 g. It was assumed that the acoustic effect of the larvae's feeding in elements A, B, D, and E did not transfer to element C, which only collected any random background noises. Piezoelectric sensors were attached to the radial cross-section of the wooden elements using GE Bayer Silicone grease.  
In July/August 2021, two-channel recording of longhorn beetle larvae (Hylotrupes bajulus L.) activity under controlled conditions on roof structures was carried out. Controlled conditions were understood as knowledge of the presence of larvae in the wood (number of larvae and their mass). For this purpose, wooden elements with larvae were placed in pairs with the same element without larvae mounted in the roof structures in such a way that the AE apparatus could receive all acoustic signals from the roof structure and roof covering. All signals comprised the sounds of larvae feeding as well as the creaking of the wooden structure and banging sounds on the roof covering (birds jumping, falling branches and cones, etc.). The longhorn beetle larvae were obtained from a breeding facility conducted in the laboratory of Warsaw University of Life Sciences – SGGW.  
In the first stage, the effectiveness of the system was tested on one small roof structure (roof no. I) and 4 elements with larvae. Acoustic signals were recorded with two channels from wooden blocks measuring 5 x 10 x 20 cm (Fig. 1). They were secured using single bar clamps to 2 adjacent segments of the roof structure covered with metal roofing tiles. One block (C as a control) did not contain live larvae, while 2 larvae were placed in each of the remaining blocks (A, B, D, and E) in drilled holes in sapwood with a diameter corresponding to the diameter of their bodies. The distance between the holes with larvae was 3-4 cm. The holes were sealed with a plate made of transparent plastic, secured with pins to prevent the larvae from turning and falling out of the wood. Measurements were conducted 2 weeks after introducing the larvae into the wood, when it was ensured that the larvae had burrowed into the wood. For each measurement, pairs of blocks were placed (element C without larvae and one of the four elements A, B, D, E with larvae). The sensors were placed on the surface of blocks measuring 5 x 20 cm under the location of the larvae (Fig. 1).  

Fig. 1. Measurements in the first stage of the experiments on roof construction no. I – the locations of the sensors are visible. C indicates the block without larvae. On the second block with larvae, 4 pins securing the transparent plastic plate to the wood are visible, sealing the hole with the larva.  
After confirming the effectiveness of the methodology in the first stage, the second stage was initiated. In the second stage, experiments on the registration of acoustic signals were conducted on 3 roof structures. Recording on each roof was carried out on 4 wooden elements (A, B, D, and E) with larvae and a control element C without larvae. Each time, the same sets of measurement elements were sequentially placed in pairs on the subsequent roofs. The dimensions of the elements were 5 x 10 x 220 cm. 2 larvae were placed in drilled holes in sapwood on the 5 x 10 cm surface of each of the 4 elements. The same larvae used in the blocks in the first stage of the experiment were used in the individual elements. The distance between the holes with larvae was 3-4 cm. The holes were closed with transparent plastic plates and the larvae were allowed to burrow into the wood. Each time, a pair of elements (element C without larvae and one of the elements A, B, D, and E with larvae) was placed on the roof structure. The elements were secured to adjacent rafters. Each element was attached using one pair of bar clamps (Fig. 2). Measurements were conducted at points in the middle of the 5 x 220 cm surface at intervals of 50 cm starting from the point under where the larvae were placed and at analogous points on the control element C. The distance between adjacent rafters and the elements with larvae attached to them was 70-75 cm. It was assumed that the acoustic effect of the larvae's feeding in elements A, B, D, and E did not transfer to element C, which only collected background noises.  
In all cases of the first and second stages, the sensors were smeared with GE Bayer Silicones and strongly pressed against the wood with rubber bands. The recording of acoustic signals on all 3 roof structures was conducted with air temperatures in the attic ranging from 20 to 40 °C, which conditioned the activity of the larvae (Creemers 2015, Krajewski et al. 2017, Krajewski et al. 2020).  

Fig. 2. The second stage of the experiments on roof structure no. II and large elements – elements attached to the rafters, lower bar clamps, and wires leading to the sensors are visible. C indicates the element without larvae.  
NOTE: the lower surface of Fig. 2 must be cut off because a single-channel recording is visible, or replaced with a photo of the laptop with the two-channel recording (the better option - to be done).   
In the context of construction practice, a quick and uncomplicated visual assessment of the effects of recording the presence of larvae in the wooden structure is crucial. The recording is evaluated on the laptop screen. For this reason, the detectability of larvae was assessed visually based on the recorded outputs for each measurement point in the four elements on each of the three roof structures. The following scale was adopted for evaluation: no recording -, 1-2 visible signals +, 3-5 signals ++, more than 5 signals +++.